All right.
I now want to apply Gauss his law to a slightly more complicated object.
Again we're going to choose a spherical symmetric object in this case here is not going to be a conductor
it will be an insulator.
And imagine I have a ball and I've uniformly spread out charge inside the ball.
OK so here I've illustrated over here The ball has a certain radius which I'm calling uppercase R and
it does have a total charge which could be anything.
Five columns 10 cool homes it doesn't matter but that charge is not just on the surface like a conductor.
It's uniformly distributed.
OK.
So how would we actually apply Gauss is low.
So in this case there's two different limits that you have to look at.
OK we're first going to focus on the field outside this ball and then we're going to see well what happens
if I was inside the ball what would the electric field look like inside the ball.
OK so let's look at both of these cases and how we apply Gauss as law.
First of all the left hand side of Gauss is law which has the field in the area.
This case is always the same for spherical symmetric objects.
The only thing that's going to be different now will be how much charges enclosed.
OK so let's look at it you'll see what I mean.
Right.
So my first case is when I'm outside that means that I want to evaluate it at a point that is outside
of this object.
So in that case it becomes pretty similar to what we previously did you choose a gaussian surface that
has the same symmetry as my object.
So it will be a sphere and its radius is little.
All right in this case again this total object here all of the charge that I've highlighted in orange
has a total charge uppercase Q So let's imagine we're going to evaluate Gauss as law for this object.
So the total charging close is just uppercase Q And that's divided by epsilon 0.
That's the total flux going through this blue surface.
So how would you evaluate the field now.
Again the left hand side of Gauss is lost simply the magnitude of the field multiplied by the area in
the area that I'm interested in is always the area of my closed surface.
Right.
It's always the close surface over here that we're interested in.
So this here would be for PI and R squared.
That is the area of a spherical object.
So at the end the electric field is simply q over for Pi ask let's say sorry Epsilon 0.
Multiply by our squared.
Okay.
This is the same result as we have before 1 over for pie Epsilon zero K Q over our squared right.
When you're on the outside of this object it behaves again just like a point charge you get the same
field as though you would have just a simple point charge and you were evaluating at some distance are
away right this here is a distance are between here and here and I was evaluating the field that point
P I could right away just simply write down this expression right.
So outside it behaves very very similarly to our previous results what makes this problem a little bit
more complicated now is to evaluate the field inside.
Okay so let's look at this now.
All right.
Now I want to look at the case where I'm evaluating the electric field at some point inside this spherical
object.
All right so let's write down Gauss is log in we're going to have our Gaussian surface which is here
the Goshen surface again has a little radius r and it's a spherical object so the left hand side of
Gauss is law.
Always the same the magnitude of the field multiplied by the total area of my spherical object.
So this has to be equal to the enclosed charge divided by epsilon 0.
The question is how much charge do I actually have inside this blue surface I don't have the total charge.
Q I should have a fraction of it right.
So the total charge again it has a uniform charge density over here.
So you imagine here you have a uniform charge density the charge density typically for a volume you
can write the charge density as being the letter row and that should be the total charge divided by
the total volume of the object that I'm looking at.
So the total v total is while it's a spherical object.
So this would be four thirds pi r cube and notice I'm using uppercase Q because that's the charge density.
All right.
So how do I find how much charge is inside this other volume.
Well it's gonna we're gonna call this the charging closed and close this simply going to be the charge
density multiplied by the volume enclosed by that surface.
So that B What's the density what's the volume in close what's the volume of my blue sphere over here.
Again it's for third pi little r cube right.
All right.
So now you have to kind of substitute in what's our charge density our charge density is total charge
divided by four thirds pi our cube and multiply by the term up here for third pi it's a different RB
a little bit careful over here.
This is the volume of the blues.
And down here in the denominator is the total volume of my object.
Okay.
We can simplify some of these the four thirds pi leave.
And now I actually have a nice expression for my charge that's enclosed.
All right.
The total charge and it's a little our cube divided by big our cube.
All right we're gonna go ahead now and substitute that in my expression for the total charge.
The total charge enclosed by my surface so it looks like this.
This is little our cube divided by big our cube and I still have the Epsilon 0 over here and here let's
just leave this term unchanged for now.
I notice there's some simplifications we can make no one look at I have our squared over here and I
have our cube over here I could get rid of two of those and if I get rid of two of those I'm gonna be
left with one up there.
OK.
So what does this mean.
Well that last expression that I get now is you're gonna get one over for Pi Epsilon zero group those
terms together the total charge q here I have multiplied by R and this is divided by our cube.
Okay so I have a look this expression is actually quite different from the previous case it tells me
that the field actually gets bigger.
So look at a couple of cases what happens if little R equals to zero.
So what if what is the electric field right here at the center of the sphere.
If a little R equals zero notice what we get we get that equals to zero because there is no charge inside
a Goshen surface my Surface is really really small.
Take the limit now what happens if the little radius goes all the way to the edge of my object.
So that would look something like this if that was the case what would be the electric field.
So a little R I would substitute by uppercase R and then you would get what you'd get the same expression
that I previously had.
This would be Q and this would be divided by our squared.
This looks just like a point charge again.
The only time when it's different is when you're inside the object.
When you're inside it actually looks significantly different.
It has this dependence over here.
So if you were going to make a sketch of what the field looks like as a function of distance let me
go ahead and kind of do that on the next page.
Let me scroll down and let's plot both of these expressions.
So what I want to do now is I want to make a plot of the electric field magnitude as a function of the
distance are.
And one thing we saw that when R equals to this I have some value.
If you go back to the expression we have that on the inside.
Let's scroll up here for a second on the inside look at what it looks like.
All of this thing here is a constant and it's basically linear and R so an R gets bigger the field gets
bigger.
So let me go ahead and make a line that's this is a straight line.
And the value right here will be 1 over for Pi Epsilon zero Q over our squared as I'm on the outside
number on the outside.
The dependence is actually something the fuel actually gets smaller as I get farther away from it.
So the feel when I'm really really far away.
The electric field is really small.
So what you would say over here is that in this area over here the field is proportional to the distance
and as over in this section over here the electric field is proportional to one over the distance squared.
Just like a point charge up here over here it's significantly different it's not like a point charge
right.
The field depends linearly on the distance.
All right kind of a nice problem it doesn't get any harder than that four point charges.
Just make sure when you read problems you differentiate between insulating insulating spherical objects
and conducting right because a conductor is significantly different.
Remember our conductor now would look like this our conductor would have E equals to zero inside for
a conductor because all the charges at the surface and then you would have this dependence here for
a conductor the same as the case we just dealt with all right.
Hopefully that makes sense to you.